Provide "Use a persistent conversation cache" tutorial (#295)
xmtp/xmtp-dot-org: docs/client-sdk/javascript/tutorials/use-a-persistent-conversation-cache.md

---
sidebar_label: Use a persistent conversation cache
sidebar_position: 7
---

# Use a persistent conversation cache to improve load time

For a user with a large number of ongoing conversations, loading their conversation list in real-time can be a very expensive operation from the perspective of both bandwidth and CPU usage. This is because the message API client must download all of the [conversation invites](https://xmtp.org/docs/dev-concepts/invitation-and-message-encryption) and decrypt each one using X3DH before being able to display the conversations and their messages.

To improve conversation load time, you can use the XMTP SDK to export the unencrypted conversation list in a JSON serializable format to a persistent conversation cache. For example, you can use the Zustand [`persist` middleware](https://github.com/pmndrs/zustand/blob/main/docs/integrations/persisting-store-data.md) to create a conversation cache that you can persist to the browser’s `LocalStorage`.

:::info

> The process described in this tutorial will change soon. You can implement a persistent conversation cache as described here to address performance issues in your app now. However, please be prepared to update your app to use a different approach to be provided in the near future.

Reviewer: should we provide rough timeline here, or unnecessary?

Author: @daria-github Thank you for such helpful feedback! I was a bit nervous about including this forward-looking statement here as we usually don't do that in tech docs. But I think in this case, we need to provide it as a courtesy to devs - and your feedback helped us make the info **truly** helpful. Updating this now to provide a timeline of Q2 2023.

:::

When your app creates a new message API client instance, the client can load its internal conversation cache from the browser’s persistent conversation cache.

:::warning

> Treat the conversations and data in the cache with the utmost care. Compromise of this data will allow an attacker to impersonate the user on the XMTP network. A compromised script in your app or browser extension could access this data if stored in `LocalStorage`.

Reviewer 2: Realized I overstated the danger a little

```suggestion
Treat the conversations and data in the cache with the utmost care. Compromise of this data will allow an attacker to read the user's messages on the XMTP network. A compromised script in your app or browser extension could access this data if stored in `LocalStorage`.
```

:::

## Create a persistent conversation cache

Enable your app to create the persistent conversation cache in its local storage. 

For example, see [`/store/conversationCache.ts`](https://github.com/xmtp-labs/xmtp-inbox-web/blob/main/store/conversationCache.ts) in the example XMTP Inbox web app:

```tsx
import { create } from "zustand";
import { persist } from "zustand/middleware";
import { ConversationExport } from "@xmtp/xmtp-js/dist/types/src/conversations/Conversation";
import { getEnv } from "../helpers";

> export const CONVERSATION_CACHE_VERSION = 1;

Author: @neekolas removed the separate step to create the constant. Removed the import and added the export const here.

            [walletAddress]: [...existingForWallet, convo],
          },
        });
      },
    }),
    {
      // Ensure that the LocalStorage key includes the network and the cache version
      // If any breaking changes to the ConversationExport schema occur, increment the cache version.
      name: `xmtp:conversations:${getEnv()}:v${CONVERSATION_CACHE_VERSION}`,
      partialize: (state) => ({ conversations: state.conversations }),
    },
  ),
);
```

For the `getEnv` import, see [`helpers/index.ts`](https://github.com/xmtp-labs/xmtp-inbox-web/blob/main/helpers/index.ts) and [`helpers/env.ts`](https://github.com/xmtp-labs/xmtp-inbox-web/blob/main/helpers/env.ts) in the example XMTP Inbox web app repo.

## Add conversations to the persistent cache

Add existing and new conversations to the persistent cache.

For example, see these code snippets from [`hooks/useListConversations.tsx`](https://github.com/xmtp-labs/xmtp-inbox-web/blob/main/hooks/useListConversations.tsx) in the example XMTP Inbox web app:

```tsx
import { useConversationCache } from "../store/conversationCache";

const setConversationCache = useConversationCache(
    (state) => state.setConversations,
  );

> 

Author: Thank you, @neekolas:
- Removed the `const addToConversationCache = useConversationCache( ...` function.
- Replaced all of the pre-existing code below with the `useEffect` you provided.

      }
      const conversations = await client.conversations.list()
      // ... save the conversations in your application here
      
      // Export the conversations so they can be cached
      const convoExports = await client.conversations.export();
      setConversationCache(walletAddress, convoExports);
    }

    loadConversations()
 }, [client, walletAddress])
```

## Preload conversations from the persistent cache to the message API client cache

Load conversations from the persistent cache to the client cache.

For example, see these code snippets from [`hooks/useInitXmtpClient.ts`](https://github.com/xmtp-labs/xmtp-inbox-web/blob/main/hooks/useInitXmtpClient.ts) in the example XMTP Inbox web app:

```tsx
import { useAccount, useSigner } from "wagmi";
import { address } from "../components/Address";
import { useConversationCache } from '../store/conversationCache';

const { address } = useAccount();

const conversationExports = useConversationCache((state) => state.conversations[address]);

if (conversationExports && conversationExports.length) {
  // Preload the client with conversations from the cache
  await xmtp.conversations.import(conversationExports);

> }

Reviewer 2: We can replace this code with this, which wraps it in a function:

```ts
export const useCacheLoader = () => {
  const client = useXmtpStore((state) => state.client);
  const { address } = useAccount();
  const conversationExports = useConversationCache(
    (state) => state.conversations[client.address],
  );
  useEffect(() => {
    if (!client) {
      return;
    }
    const loadFromCache = async () => {
      if (conversationExports && conversationExports.length) {
        // Preload the client with conversations from the cache
        await client.conversations.import(conversationExports);
      }
    };
  }, [client, conversationExports]);
};
```

To improve conversation load time, you can use the XMTP SDK to export the unencrypted conversation list in a JSON serializable format to a persistent conversation cache. For example, you can use the Zustand [`persist` middleware](https://github.com/pmndrs/zustand/blob/main/docs/integrations/persisting-store-data.md) to create a conversation cache that you can persist to the browser’s `LocalStorage`.

:::info

The process described in this tutorial will change soon. You can implement a persistent conversation cache as described here to address performance issues in your app now. However, please be prepared to update your app to use a different approach to be provided in the near future.

:::

When your app creates a new message API client instance, the client can load its internal conversation cache from the browser’s persistent conversation cache.

:::warning

Treat the conversations and data in the cache with the utmost care. Compromise of this data will allow an attacker to impersonate the user on the XMTP network. A compromised script in your app or browser extension could access this data if stored in `LocalStorage`.

:::

> ## Create a persistent conversation cache constant

Reviewer 3: Why do I need to create this constant?

Reviewer 2: I think this can just go into the file defined in "Create a persistent conversation cache"

Author: Thank you for this - when placed in the context of `/store/conversationCache.ts` - I believe the code annotations explain its purpose. <3

            [walletAddress]: [...existingForWallet, convo],
          },
        });
      },
    }),
    {
      // Ensure that the LocalStorage key includes the network and the cache version
      // If any breaking changes to the ConversationExport schema occur, increment the cache version.
      name: `xmtp:conversations:${getEnv()}:v${CONVERSATION_CACHE_VERSION}`,
      partialize: (state) => ({ conversations: state.conversations }),
    },
  ),
);
```

For the `getEnv` import, see [`helpers/index.ts`](https://github.com/xmtp-labs/xmtp-inbox-web/blob/main/helpers/index.ts) and [`helpers/env.ts`](https://github.com/xmtp-labs/xmtp-inbox-web/blob/main/helpers/env.ts) in the example XMTP Inbox web app repo.

## Add conversations to the persistent cache

Add existing and new conversations to the persistent cache.

For example, see these code snippets from [`hooks/useListConversations.tsx`](https://github.com/xmtp-labs/xmtp-inbox-web/blob/main/hooks/useListConversations.tsx) in the example XMTP Inbox web app:

```tsx
import { useConversationCache } from "../store/conversationCache";

const setConversationCache = useConversationCache(
    (state) => state.setConversations,
  );

> const addToConversationCache = useConversationCache(

Reviewer 2: I don't think we need this function in this simplified example

    (state) => state.addConversation,
  );

> for (const convo of convos) {

Reviewer 2: These code snippets are missing enough context for a developer to know where they should go in their app.

I think you can replace all the code below with

```ts
useEffect(() => {
    const loadConversations = async () => {
      if (!client) {
        return
      }
      const conversations = await client.conversations.list()
      // ... save the conversations in your application here
      
      // Export the conversations so they can be cached
      const convoExports = await client.conversations.export();
      setConversationCache(walletAddress, convoExports);
    }

    loadConversations()
 }, [client, walletAddress])
```
